Refactor readme into explainer (#24)
eemeli/message-resource-wg: README.md

Reviewer: It's out of the current diff, so can't comment there

> which may be used as a file format or otherwise.

That "or otherwise" feels strange. What are the other uses besides storage as a file?

> whitespace is trimmed from each line, unless it's \ escaped.

More readable as:

> unless it's escaped with `\`

Author: The data model representation of a resource could be used in interchange between APIs, even when it's not representing an actual file. But perhaps leaving the "otherwise" out is a bit clearer.

> The purpose of this effort is to
> develop a standard for [Unicode MessageFormat 2] resources,
> which may be used as a file format.

Reviewer 2: A succinct statement of purpose probably needs to be more general. One issue would be the need to provide a definition for 'resource' early on (not necessarily in this paragraph), since the word has been overloaded elsewhere (notably in the IETF space, e.g. it's the **R** in URI/URL/etc). Here we do not mean "resource == any blob of bytes" but the narrower I18N definition.

---

Perhaps:

```suggestion
Message Resource is an effort to develop
a standard common representation for localizable _resources_,
especially text strings,
which are expected to consist of [Unicode MessageFormat 2] _messages_,
including a file format that incorporates additional information
needed by the localization process or by developers.
```

Author: Going to not change this for now, as the next paragraph already defines the meaning of "resource" as it's used here. That may not have been visible in the diff, as it was already in the doc.

Author: Having just said I wouldn't change this, I then went ahead and did that, to hopefully clarify the use of message vs. resource.

and it may include additional data or metadata relating to them.
It should be possible to represent a resource in a text-based human-friendly manner.

This work was [presented](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ksgm_B-uUCU)
at the [2024 Unicode Tech Workshop](https://www.unicode.org/events/utw/2024/).

### Why?

The work on MessageFormat 2 has identified the following challenges
that go beyond or arise from the new message format,
but which are not well addressed by existing resource formats:

> - The MessageFormat 2 syntax is naturally multi-line,
>   and multi-line values are not easy to use in many of the current resource formats.

Reviewer 3: This reads a little ambiguously to me.

If you mean MF2 is better than current resource formats due to native multi-line,
```suggestion
- The MessageFormat 2 syntax is naturally multi-line,
  whereas multi-line values are not easy to use in many of the current resource formats.
```
or even
```suggestion
- The MessageFormat 2 syntax is naturally multi-line,
  whereas multi-line values are not well supported in many other resource formats.
```

Author: Ah, this is pointing at something else that needs better definition: MF2 is a _message_ format, and this effort is about defining a _resource_ format to support it. So comparing MF2 to "other resource formats" doesn't really make sense, because what comes out of this won't (necessarily) be a part of the MF2 spec, but a separate one.

- Comments and metadata are important for translators,
  but (mostly) not relevant for formatting.

>   Their attachment to messages needs to be well specified,

Reviewer: As far as I understand comments can be bound to groupings (sections). If that's correct, worth calling it out?

Possible alternatives to attachment: connection, link, binding? Later on you use "assign to", I would keep the terminology consistent.

Author: > As far as I understand comments can be bound to groupings (sections). If that's correct, worth calling it out?

That is a feature of the strawman proposal, yes, but I don't think it's necessarily a must-have part of the solution. This section is about presenting the problem.

> Possible alternatives to attachment: connection, link, binding? Later on you use "assign to", I would keep the terminology consistent.

Agreed about consistency, "attachment" is I think the best term here.

  while being easy to read, write, and ignore.
- Structured message metadata needs a common schema to be universally understood.

> - Many messages are composed of multiple localizable parts,

Reviewer: Can you help me understand this bullet point? I see you talk about composability in the context of Fluent (message/term references, attributes), but I can't connect the two here.

Author: Does this example improve things?
```suggestion
- Many messages are composed of multiple localizable parts
  (such as an HTML element with a localizable body and localizable attributes),
```

Reviewer: Still not completely clear. In your example (message with HTML elements, with localizable value and attributes), why is the resource format relevant? It feels more like a message format aspect.

Author: It's an aspect of message formatting that ought to be accommodated by the resource format.

In Fluent terms, an MF2 "message" corresponds to a `Pattern`, and a `Message` can contain a `Value` and multiple `Attributes`, each of which are separate `Patterns`. So with this different layering of concepts, it's up to the resource format to define how more than one related `Pattern` (i.e. MF2 message) can be connected together to form a single `Message`.

In the strawman proposal, that's done by allowing for messages to have identifiers like `foo.bar.label` and `foo.bar.accesskey`, and delegating to a resource loader the task of doing something reasonable when it's called on to featch and format the message `foo.bar`. But is that enough? Should functions like `:message` or `:term` also be defined? Or should some entirely other solution be provided?

I would count this as an open question, which still needs to be resolved.

  and it should be possible to express a compound message formed of multiple connected parts.
- A purpose-built localization resource format should be well specified,
  and designed from the ground up to work with multiple implementations.

Some of these aspects are well supported by existing formats,
but no one resource format serves all of the identified use cases.
For instance:

> - Comments in Gettext .po files come in multiple types and [clearly assign] to the following entry,

Author: ```suggestion
- Comments in Gettext .po files come in multiple types and [clearly attaches] to the following entry,
```

  but its representation of multi-line values is rather clumsy.
- Fluent supports composability via [attributes] and [message references],
  but its FTL format is tightly coupled with its own message format.
- XLIFF is an [OASIS Standard],
  but it's primarily a machine interchange format that is not designed for human authoring

>   and its message representation does not provide for message variants.

Reviewer: Are plurals variants? If not, what's a variant in this context?

Author: Plurals are variants, yes, but messages can also vary e.g. based on gender.

Reviewer: Just to confirm, there is no official support of plurals in the XLIFF standard? I'm finding contracdictory statements about support (and format) for XLIFF 2.

Author: Correct, XLIFF 2 does not ineherently support plurals. It does allow for a message to contain some completely separate syntax like ICU MessageFormat that does support plurals, and there are hacks that e.g. Apple's Xcode mapping does by generating separate localizable messages for each plural variant, but the resource format itself provides no such support.

It would of course be possible to define a JSON or XML Schema
for a resource format that would address all of the above issues.

> However, while these formats are relatively easy to read, they are not easy to _write_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, while JSON and XML are relatively easy to read, they are not easy to _write_.
```

This would disadvantage in particular translators
who do not have access to tooling beyond a simple text editor.

> JSON/XML schemas could of course be defined as a part of the effort,

Author: ```suggestion
JSON/XML schemas should be defined as a part of the effort,
```

to represent a data model view of the resource formats,

> complimenting the [message data model].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
complementing the [message data model].
```

I would drop at least one "of course", if not both from this paragraph.

> [clearly assign]: https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/manual/html_node/PO-Files.html

Author: ```suggestion
[clearly attaches]: https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/manual/html_node/PO-Files.html
```

[attributes]: https://projectfluent.org/fluent/guide/attributes.html
[message references]: https://projectfluent.org/fluent/guide/references.html
[message data model]: https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/tree/main/spec/data-model
[OASIS Standard]: https://docs.oasis-open.org/xliff/xliff-core/v2.1/os/xliff-core-v2.1-os.html

### Paths to Adoption

The field of localization is not new, and already features many competing solutions,
with workflows, tools and practices used by many different projects,
each of which have different needs.
In this environment, a new solution should not aim to replace all parts at once,
but to provide a modular, layered approach that users could benefit from
without needing to adopt all parts of the new standard.

This approach is already fundamental to the MessageFormat 2 specification,
which is designed to be embeddable in any existing resource formats.
The resource format work should follow a similar approach,
for example by ensuring that its data model provides not only a useful representation
of any syntax representation of a resource format defined here,
but also all existing resource formats.

> Doing so would make it much easier for resource format conversion tools to be built,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Doing so makes it much easier for resource format conversion tools to be built,
```

not only to the new format, but even between existing formats.

Similarly, a well-defined set of message properties or metadata
could be adopted completely separately from the rest of the specification.
It should still be defined within the context of the new resource format,

> to ensure that its requirements are addressed by the resource format,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to ensure that its requirements are addressed,
```

the work can be split into the following parts:

1. Defining the resource syntax.
2. Defining the data model representation of a resource.
3. Defining a vocabulary for message and resource properties/metadata.

While the primary driver for the work is to support MessageFormat 2,
other current and future localization formats also need to be considered.
For example, it should be possible to:

- represent a Gettext `.po` file using the data model,
- use the same message properties within some other custom resource format, or
- embed messages with a different format than MF2 in a message resource.

The definition of a resource loader is not within the scope of this work,
except insofar as its concerns impact the deliverables enumerated above.

### Syntax

As currently proposed,
a message resource looks like this
(syntax highlighting only approximate):

```ini
# The resource-level locale is the only required property.
@locale en-US
---

one = A plain, simple message.

@version 2.1
@max-length 42
two = A message with some properties

# Freeform comments must come before properties.
# Multiline messages and properties are indented,

> # with each line's leading whitespace trimmed from their value.

Reviewer 3: This could be read that the below param should parse as `@param $foobar - An input argumentwith a multiline description` (but a sensible reader will understand that the newline ought to be translated to a whitespace).

Author: Actually, the intent is for the value to parse as
```
@param $foobar - An input argument
with a multiline description
```
i.e. the newline isn't discarded or collapsed at this level. That might of course happen at a further stage.

Author: ```suggestion
# with each line's leading whitespace trimmed from their value.
# Newlines within values are retained.
```

and it may include additional data or metadata relating to them.
It should be possible to represent a resource in a text-based human-friendly manner.

This work was [presented](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ksgm_B-uUCU)
at the [2024 Unicode Tech Workshop](https://www.unicode.org/events/utw/2024/).

### Why?

The prior work on a new message format has identified the following challenges
that go beyond or arise from defining the syntax and behavior of a single message,
but which are not well addressed by existing resource formats:

- The MessageFormat 2 message syntax is naturally multi-line,

>   and multi-line values are not easy to use in many of the current resource formats.

Reviewer 2: Not just multiline, but _structured_.

Author: ```suggestion
- The MessageFormat 2 message syntax is naturally multi-line due to its internal structure,
  and multi-line values are not easy to use in many of the current resource formats.
```

> - Comments and metadata are important for translators,
>   but (mostly) not relevant for formatting.

Reviewer 2: Maybe break these apart. Requirements are _interesting_.

```suggestion
- Comments are an important means for translators and developers
   to communicate with one-another
   or for maintenance, but are irrelevant to the retrieval and display of the message.
- Metadata likewise provides information that assists the translation process,
   especially where tooling or CAT technology is used.
```

Author: Expanding on this a bit makes sense, but I don't think these should be separated. Both of these (and metadata in particular) can be defined either manually or by tools, and should be handled the same way.

```suggestion
- Comments and metadata (set either by automation or manually)
  are an important means for translators and developers to communicated with one-another,
  but are irrelevant to the retrieval and display of the message.
```

  Their attachment to messages needs to be well specified,
  while being easy to read, write, and ignore.

> - Structured message metadata needs a common schema to be universally understood.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps start transitioning from "message" to "resource" somewhere in here. @flodolo's resolved comment is a good one: resource files might be structured into blocks of messages or have file-level information. Hence:

```suggestion
- Structures resource metadata needs a common schema in order to be universally understood.
```

Author: Let's add this as a separate point:

```suggestion
- Structured metadata needs a common schema in order to be universally understood.
- Hierarchical groupings of messages need to be representable,
  and metadata be assignable not only to individual messages,
  but also groups of messages.
```

- Many messages are composed of multiple localizable parts

>   (such as an HTML element with a localizable body and localizable attributes),

Reviewer 2: Again, I'd say "resource" here to avoid confusion with MF2 _message_... although you might intend _message_ here, e.g.:

```
.local $name = {|Your Name|}
{{Your name is {#html:input type=text value=$name /}.}} 
```

Author: I do mean message here, and the difficulties that arise e.g. when translating your example to a language where the "Your" within the literal needs to vary depending on the person's gender.

This is solvable in MF2 by making the message as a whole vary, but then it's not possible to have a single `$name` value as above, and it arguably gets a bit hacky.

I'll add a clarification at the end of this item about this.

Reviewer 2: I agree that my example is kind of sh%ty, but a resource system might solve it differently than MF2 does:

```
@type=multipart
@comment All my parts go together :-)
myMessage = {
   value = |Your Name|
   altText = |Foo|
   url = ...mumble....
   message = {#html:img url=$url alt=$altText/} Your name is {#html:input type=text value=$value /}.
}

Author: Yeah, something like that is one potential solution. I don't think there's necessarily a better word than "message" to describe something like your `myMessage` value, though.

Reviewer 2: Resource? Imagine that the file contains a base64 encoded .ico? Or an external file reference? Probably better to resolve this comment. Color selection for the bikeshed can wait.

Author: How about this?
```suggestion
- Many localizable messages need to be composed together
  (such as an HTML element with a localizable body and localizable attributes),
```

>   and it should be possible to express a compound message formed of multiple connected parts.

Author: ```suggestion
  and it should be possible to express a compound message formed of multiple connected parts.
  While MessageFormat 2 does support e.g. markup elements with option values,
  this may make it difficult to segment a message's localizable parts from each other.
```

- A purpose-built localization resource format should be well specified,

>   and designed from the ground up to work with multiple implementations.

Reviewer 2: Maybe add: it should be possible to compile it into or derive it from existing formats?

Author: ```suggestion
- A purpose-built localization resource format should be well specified,
  and designed from the ground up to work with multiple implementations.
  Its design and capabilities need to account for existing localization formats,
  and allow for the representation of messages and resources in those formats.
```

Some of these aspects are well supported by existing formats,
but no one resource format serves all of the identified use cases.
For instance:

- Comments in Gettext .po files come in multiple types and [clearly attaches] to the following entry,
  but its representation of multi-line values is rather clumsy.
- Fluent supports composability via [attributes] and [message references],
  but its FTL format is tightly coupled with its own message format.
- XLIFF is an [OASIS Standard],
  but it's primarily a machine interchange format that is not designed for human authoring
  and its message representation does not provide for message variants.

It would of course be possible to define a JSON or XML Schema
for a resource format that would address all of the above issues.
However, while JSON and XML are relatively easy to read, they are not easy to _write_.
This would disadvantage in particular translators

> who do not have access to tooling beyond a simple text editor.

Reviewer 2: Most translators work on post-processed files that have already been segmented (or they do this segmentation themselves using CAT tools). Their tools focuses on _protecting_ the _existing_ format that the strings are found in, rather than interacting with it. To that end, using JSON or XML or whatever is irrelevant unless/until translators adopt tools that interact with the format itself, e.g. like XLIFF.

You do not mention developers. Developers have to be incented to adopt the format and write resources in it. Some of that could happen through IDE support or platform support. But initially (and later, for some platforms), it has to be easy for them to grok--and love. 

This was actually a consideration when we made Amazon's internal format (PUFF), where we chose JSON as the basis (because most developers have a JSON editor) and we could add a Schema and later on tooling to support editing at a richer basis. This is not to suggest that it should be JSON. Just that developers (and later translators) are the target audience and the larger point about ease of authoring is an important one.

Familiarity seems important? Also, "simple text editor" is important: binary formats need not apply.

Author: ```suggestion
This would disadvantage in particular developers and translators
who do not have access to tooling beyond a simple text editor.
```

Reviewer 2: People will quibble with "developers... do not have access.. beyond a simple text editor"? Perhaps:

```suggestion
This is a disadvantage to users, such as developers or translators,
who expect to use existing editors, especially simple text editors,
to create and manage these files.
```

- A purpose-built localization resource format should be well specified,
  and designed from the ground up to work with multiple implementations.
  Its design and capabilities need to account for existing localization formats,
  and allow for the representation of messages and resources in those formats.

Some of these aspects are well supported by existing formats,
but no one resource format serves all of the identified use cases.
For instance:

- Comments in Gettext .po files come in multiple types and each [clearly attaches] to the following entry,
  but the format's representation of multi-line values is rather clumsy.
- Fluent supports composability via [attributes] and [message references],
  but its FTL format is tightly coupled with its own message format.
- XLIFF is an [OASIS Standard],
  but it is primarily a machine interchange format that is not designed for human authoring
  and its message representation does not provide for message variants.

It would of course be possible to define a JSON or XML Schema
for a resource format that would address all of the above issues.
However, while JSON and XML are relatively easy to read, they are not easy to _write_.

> This would disadvantage in particular developers and translators
> who do not have access to tooling beyond a simple text editor.

Author: Applying suggestion made by @aphillips in https://github.com/eemeli/message-resource-wg/pull/24#discussion_r1925999984
```suggestion
This is a disadvantage to users, such as developers or translators,
who expect to use existing editors, especially simple text editors,
to create and manage these files.
```
